The cephalophages are a divergent species of humanity, notable as the only ones whose transformations are passed on to their offspring. Due to their extreme biological differences, cephalophages form their own society and religious beliefs, and are generally loathed by baseline humans.

Cephalophages have elongated heads and higher brain volume compared to baseline humanity, with powerful jaws capable of unhinging. They have an extraordinarily efficient metabolism, and are able to go months without food if necessary. However, cephalophages are required once every nine years to consume the head of a living human. This can be either a baseline human or another cephalophage. During the process of consumption, the cephalophage unhinges their jaw around the other's head, then severs the neck with their teeth. Digestion of the head takes place over a few days, during which the eater enters a comatose state. Psychoactive substances released during the digestion of the brain will cause the eater to experience extremely vivid dreams during this period. These dreams can vary in detail, but follow a structure that is shared between all cephalophages.

The biological necessity of head-eating plays an important role in cephalophage culture. It is believed that consuming the head of another and digesting their soul imparts some of the deceased's memories and personality. The religious leader of a community is responsible for selecting a community member to be eaten whenever a cephalophage becomes hungry. More often than not, the selected individual is elderly and near the end of their life. Elderly individuals will usually be eaten by their family members. Criminals will usually be buried or cremated rather than eaten, which is seen as an undesirable fate.

Sometimes, craftsmen and learned individuals who wish to retire will nominate themselves to be eaten by an apprentice, imparting their talent and wisdom onto the next generation. This practice is known as gut-marriage. The apprentice is required to pay a dowry to the family of the eaten, after which they become a member of the family and are expected to support the family through their craft.

Most baseline humans see cephalophages and their cultural practices as abhorrent. Due to their preference to live in isolated, hidden communities, most baseline humans will only ever encounter starving cephalophages who have been exiled from their community, leading to their reputation as savages. There are some documented cases of baseline humans living in cephalophage society.