Long ago, the primitive Adamites lived under the watchful eye of their god in the Garden of Eden: a paradise where they languished for many aeons. The Adamites never wanted for anything, and never came to harm. Eden was a place of safety, and so the Adamites lacked many features of modern humanity; notably, they were headless. The ancient Adamites needed no eyes to hunt for predators or search for food; they had no mouths, as there was no need to eat. They had no voice to share their inner thoughts, as their spiritual needs were fulfilled through their innate connection to God. Their bodies were bulky and sluggish, and their hands had thousands of fingers, symbolizing their inherent divinity. They lived in Eden for an immeasurable amount of time, but God soon began to die, and the trees of Eden withered and rotted. The Adamites were expelled from the garden and underwent a series of drastic transformations at the hands of God's angels, which would prepare them for life without a god.

The parts of the world depicted in the game are dominated by an Abrahamic religion following this creation myth, which is described in an alternate version of the Book of Genesis known as the Gospel of Methuselah. It is named for the longest-lived descendant of the Adamites, who saw humanity as profane and lacking in divinity. He was disgusted by the need for sensory organs and reproduction, and wished to return to Eden; a popular sentiment in contemporary society.

The technology of the modern era has allowed people to surgically transform their bodies in drastic ways. Extreme body modification is commonplace, as people attempt to transfigure themselves into a less profane form.